---
layout: default
title: "ECON202: Intermediate Macroeconomics"
course_description: "An advanced treatment of the dynamics of the macro-economy, which includes topics related to the determination of aggregate output, the determination of the interest rate, business cycle theories and stabilization, the stock market, household and firm behavior in the macro-economy, and debates in macroeconomics."
next: ../Unit01
previous: ../../../
---
Course Syllabus for "ECON202: Intermediate Macroeconomics"
----------------------------------------------------------

In this course, you will build on and apply what you learned in the
introductory macroeconomics course
([ECON102](http://www.saylor.org/courses/econ102/)).   You will use the
concepts of output, unemployment, inflation, consumption, and investment
to study the dynamics of an economy at a more advanced level.   For
example, now that you understand the relationship between supply and
demand in general terms, you will be asked to examine the effects that
short-run and long-run price changes have on full employment and
output.  As the course progresses, you will gain a better appreciation
for how policy shifts and changes in one sector impact the rest of the
macroeconomy (whether the impacts are intended or unintended).  You will
also examine the causes of inflation and depression, and discuss various
approaches to responding to them.  By the end of this course, you should
be able to think critically about the economy and develop your own
unique perspective on various issues. Remember that macroeconomics
attempts to explain the role of government and the scope of total
production in a national economy.  Economists use abstract quantitative
tools to develop concepts about how markets and systems work; basic
assumptions are made and then relaxed to create more flexible and
realistic models.  This course will use a variety of mathematical
techniques to describe how the macroeconomy changes over time.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, the student will be able
to:  
  

-   Explain the standard theory in macroeconomics at an intermediate
    level.
-   Explain and use the basic tools of macroeconomic theory, and apply
    them to help address problems in public policy.
-   Analyze the role of government in allocating scarce resources.
-   Explain how inflation affects entire economic systems.
-   Synthesize the impact of employment and unemployment in a free
    market economy.
-   Build macroeconomic models to describe changes over time in monetary
    and fiscal policy.
-   Compare and contrast arguments concerning business, consumers and
    government, and make good conjectures regarding the possible
    solutions.
-   Analyze the methods of computing and explaining how much is produced
    in an economy.
-   Apply basic tools that are used in many fields of economics,
    including uncertainty, capital and investment, and economic growth.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course, you must:  
  
 √    Have access to a computer.  
  
 √    Have continuous broadband Internet access.  
  
 √    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.
Adobe Reader or Flash).  
  
 √    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.  
  
 √    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (e.g. .doc,
.ppt, .xls, etc.).  
  
 √    Be competent in the English language.  

√    Have read the [Saylor Student
Handbook.](http://www.saylor.org/site/wp-content/uploads/2012/05/Saylor-StudentHandbook.pdf)

√    Have completed the following courses: [ECON101: Principles of
Microeconomics](http://www.saylor.org/courses/econ101/); [ECON102:
Principles of Macroeconomics](http://www.saylor.org/courses/econ102/);
[ECON103/MA101: Single-Variable Calculus
I](http://www.saylor.org/courses/econ103/); [MA103: Multivariable
Calculus](http://www.saylor.org/courses/ma103/); [ECON104/MA121:
Introduction to Statistics](http://www.saylor.org/courses/econ104/).

### Course Information

Welcome to Intermediate Macroeconomics!  This class presents a rigorous
framework for developing economic analysis.  The material is detailed
and relies heavily upon a variety of quantitative skills.  The course
utilizes sophisticated mathematical techniques to explain basic
underpinnings of macroeconomic theory.  While some of the concepts are
similar to those in the introductory macroeconomics course, the material
in this class develops more complex relationships and requires greater
synthesis of abstract ideas.

For many economics majors, Intermediate Macroeconomics is their first
exposure to developing abstract models about entire economic systems;
however, remember to explore theory and policy applications.  For
example, consider how a significant change in government policy causes a
ripple effect throughout the entire economy. An abstract model may
indicate one solution, but also think about the practical policy
outcomes.  Reflect on the meaning of the models in a broader context and
develop the ideas from both a business and social science perspective.

Below, please find general information on this course and its
requirements. 

**Course Designer:**  Joy Zhao and [Tony Pizur,
Ph.D.](http://www.saylor.org/faculty-o-t/#ProfessorTonyPizur)

**Primary Resources:** This course is comprised of a range of different
free, online materials.  However, the course makes primary use of the
following materials:

-   David Andolfatto’s *[Macroeconomic Theory & Policy, 2<sup>nd</sup>
    ed.](http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/6403/)* is the main text used in
    the course. 
-   Lectures from
    [Berkeley](http://itunes.apple.com/us/itunes-u/economics-100b-001-spring/id438300922),
    and
    [Yale](http://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/14-quantifying-uncertainty/id428549105?i=92460075)
    complement the main text.

**Requirements for Completion:** In order to complete this course, you
will need to work through each unit and all of its assigned materials. 
Listen to each of the lectures and read each of the assigned chapters
from the text.  Problem sets will be offered in each unit to help you
complete the final exam, which consists of 50 multiple-choice questions.

Note that you will only receive an official grade on your final exam.
 However, in order to adequately prepare for this exam, you will need to
work through the quizzes and problem sets listed above.  In order to
“pass” this course, you will need to earn a 70% or higher on the final
exam.  Your score on the exam will be tabulated as soon as you complete
it.  If you do not pass the exam, you may take it again.

**Time Commitment:** This course should take you a total of **90.5**
hours to complete.  Each unit includes a “time advisory” that lists the
amount of time you are expected to spend on each subunit.  These should
help you plan your time accordingly.  The required time to complete the
course depends greatly on your proficiency in multi-variable calculus. 
Those students with a stronger quantitative background should find that
information is presented in a straightforward fashion and that each unit
should take approximately the listed time advisory to complete.  Those
students needing to further develop their calculus skills may take
considerably longer to complete the course; it is possible to ponder a
single equation for some time.  It may be useful to take a look at these
time advisories and to determine how much time you have over the next
few weeks to complete each unit, and then to set goals for yourself
based upon your proficiency with calculus.  For example, unit 1 should
take you about 17 hours to complete.  Perhaps you can sit down with your
calendar and decide to complete subunit 1.1 (a total of 3 hours) on
Monday, subunit 1.2 (a total of 4 hours) on both Tuesday and Wednesday,
etc.

**Tips/Suggestions:** As noted in the “Course Requirements,”
multi-variable calculus ([MA103](http://www.saylor.org/courses/ma103/))
is a pre-requisite for this course.  If you are struggling with the
mathematics as you progress through this course, consider taking a break
to revisit [MA103](http://www.saylor.org/courses/ma103/), focusing
especially on optimization techniques.  Do not get discouraged if some
of the equations look daunting; try to break them down and understand
what they mean in terms of theory or applications.  For example, you can
write what a concept means in words and then compare it to how same
ideas are expressed in an equation.  Usually, the individual terms (or
parts) of an equation correspond to a particular theory or policy
implication.  This should help you understand how the theory, policy
issues, and quantitative methods relate to each other.  After a set
time, perhaps 15 minutes, set any puzzling material aside and return to
it later with a fresh perspective.  

Many of the assumptions in the models are somewhat unrealistic on first
inspection.   For example, certain functions are used more for their
differentiability rather than for their ability to describe real-world
phenomena.  As you progress in economics, these assumptions can be
relaxed to build models that better approximate the actual environment.
